Nb final edits overall (#25)
R4EPI/R4EPIs-website: content/welcome/_index.en.md

weight: 1
---

This page describes important first steps for getting started with R, RStudio, and the templates!

A step-by-step walk-through of an outbreak template case study is available in the Training Materials pages of this website.

## NECESSARY COMPONENTS

### R

**R is a free software for statistical computing and graphics.** The templates need at least R version 3.3. We recommend [downloading R directly from CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org), a central repository of R code, packages, and documentation. If desired, [the MRAN version of R](https://mran.microsoft.com/) will work as well.

> > **Caveat if using MRAN**: MRAN is a version of R that has modifications that are outside the scope of this project, however, it should be noted that it also locks the version of all packages to a specific date, so care is needed to specify repositories when installing R packages. If you are unsure whether you have MRAN or CRAN R installed then see this [FAQ](<https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/wiki/4). 

Reviewer: I've migrated the wiki on the github to this website so there is no need to link there. 

```suggestion
{{% notice info %}}
**Caveat if using MRAN**: MRAN is a version of R that has modifications that are outside the scope of this project, however, it should be noted that it also locks the version of all packages to a specific date, so care is needed to specify repositories when installing R packages. If you are unsure whether you have MRAN or CRAN R installed then see this [FAQ](https://r4epis.netlify.com/faq/#i-am-unsure-if-i-have-the-mran-or-cran-version-of-r-installed). 
{{% /notice %}}
```

Your Global Options window should look like this:

> ![RStudio global options window showing a setting optimal for reproducibility](images/RStudio_global_options.jfif?width=30pc)

Reviewer: You might want to change this file name. jfif is not a commonly recognized format.

When writing RMarkdown and code, it's common to wrap your text at 80 characters. You can add a reference line for this in RStudio:

![Margin line setting in RStudio global options](images/show_margins.png)

### Setting the default R repository if using MRAN

If you are using Microsoft's version of R (MRAN), the packages are all locked to one specific date (as of this writing, it's 2018-08-07). 

> If you are unsure whether you have MRAN or CRAN R installed then see the [FAQ](<https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/wiki/4). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are unsure whether you have MRAN or CRAN R installed then see this [FAQ](https://r4epis.netlify.com/faq/#i-am-unsure-if-i-have-the-mran-or-cran-version-of-r-installed).
```

## If you wish it to go faster, run: installr::updateR(TRUE)
```

### Installing the **sitrep** package 

The **sitrep** package, developed by MSF and partners, is stored on the website GitHub. Therefore, the procedure to install is different than for most packages you will work with. 

To install **sitrep** from GitHub you must first install the **remotes** package. 

``` r
install.packages("remotes", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com")
```

Once **remotes** is installed, use its *install_github* function to install **sitrep** from the appropriate repository on GitHub. 
This command below will install the **sitrep** package and also install any packages necessary for use of the templates that are not currently installed on your machine.

*It will not, however, update any packages already installed. If you want it to update packages, then you should change the last argument to `update = "ask"`.*

```r
remotes::install_github("R4EPI/sitrep", repos = "https://cran.rstudio.com", update = "never")
```
 

> If you are getting errors, check the [FAQ section](<https://github.com/R4EPI/sitrep/wiki/4) of the **sitrep** wiki. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are getting errors, check the [frequently asked questions](https://r4epis.netlify.com/faq/).
```
